A general pass to the volume snapshots feature (#228)
okteto/docs: src/content/cloud/volume-snapshots.mdx

id: volume-snapshots
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Volume snapshots allows you to initialize persistent volume claims with the contents of a preexisting volume snapshot.
Use volume snapshots when working with large datasets or if you want to create development environments with real data coming from your production or staging environments.

## Requirements

<Tabs
  defaultValue="self-hosted"
  values={[
    { label: 'Self-Hosted', value: 'self-hosted', },
    { label: 'SaaS', value: 'saas', },
  ]}
>
<TabItem value="self-hosted">

Follow [this guide](/docs/self-hosted/administration/volume-snapshots/) to enable Volume Snapshots in your cluster.

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="saas">
If your instance is hosted by Okteto, Volume Snapshots are enabled by default.
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Using Volume Snapshots in your Development Environment

### Creating a Volume Snapshot

Okteto allows developers to initialize persistent volume claims with the contents of any preexisting volume snapshot.
The volume snapshot is created from a persistent volume claim and it can contain database backups, big files, images, a copy of your staging data, etc.

> The source persistent volume claim must have a storage class that supports volume snapshots. For Okteto SaaS users that means `csi-okteto-standard` or `csi-okteto-ssd`:

Author: I added this to the guide. Due to scalability issues, we don't use the csi driver by default. If the source PVC doesn't have the right storage class, the feature doesn't work

Reviewer: No migration, just create new storage classes and use those in docs. I'll file an issue for that.

> The source persistent volume claim must have a storage class that supports volume snapshots. For Okteto SaaS users that means `csi-okteto-standard` or `csi-okteto-ssd`:

Reviewer: Can we link to a doc on what does it mean to have a storage class that supports volume snapshots?

> The source persistent volume claim must have a storage class that supports volume snapshots. For Okteto SaaS users that means `csi-okteto-standard` or `csi-okteto-ssd`:

Reviewer: 'For Okteto SaaS users that means `csi-okteto-standard` or `csi-okteto-ssd` ' -> this should be moved to the SaaS section.

> The source persistent volume claim must have a storage class that supports volume snapshots. For Okteto SaaS users that means `csi-okteto-standard` or `csi-okteto-ssd`:

Author: Today we don't limit that, the user can choose based on their needs

> The source persistent volume claim must have a storage class that supports volume snapshots. For Okteto SaaS users that means `csi-okteto-standard` or `csi-okteto-ssd`:

Reviewer: Yeah, but how can they make the choice? Can we explain a bit more on what each gives you, the requirements and limitations?

> <Tabs

Reviewer: It's not clear what this part is for. I think we should structure this doc a bit more like a tutorial, or at least have clear sections on the pieces needed, similar to the blog post we wrote.

1. Launch a resource with storage
2. Create a snapshot of the PVC
3.  Consume the Volume Snapshot as part of your Cloud Development Environment

Author: I will give it a try based on the existing blog post

  defaultValue="kubernetes"
  values={[
    { label: 'Kubernetes', value: 'kubernetes', },
    { label: 'Compose', value: 'compose', },
  ]}
>
<TabItem value="kubernetes">

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: mysql-pvc
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-okteto-standard
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 10Gi
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="compose">

```yaml
services:
  mysql:
    image: mysql
    volumes:
      - mysql-pvc:/var/lib/mysql

volumes:
  mysql-pvc:
    driver_opts:
      class: csi-okteto-standard
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

> The following manifest creates a volume snapshot from the `mysql-pvc` persistent volume claim:

Reviewer: Can you mention that this is the same process for both Kubernetes or docker compose?

Use the `dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-name` and `dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-namespace` annotations on any persistent volume claim to tell Okteto to initialize your persistent volume claim from an existing volume snapshot, as shown below:

<Tabs
  defaultValue="kubernetes"
  values={[
    { label: 'Kubernetes', value: 'kubernetes', },
    { label: 'Compose', value: 'compose', },
  ]}
>
<TabItem value="kubernetes">

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  annotations:
    dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-name: mysql-snapshot
    dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-namespace: staging
  name: pvc-from-snapshot
spec:
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 10Gi
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="compose">

```yaml
services:
  mongodb:
    image: mysql
    volumes:
      - data:/var/lib/mysql

volumes:
  data:
    labels:
      dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-name: mysql-snapshot
      dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-namespace: staging
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

If the annotation `dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-namespace` is not defined, Okteto will default to the namespace of the new persistent volume claim.

> Use the annotation `dev.okteto.com/skip-snapshot-if-same-namespace: "true"` to skip the data cloning operation if the source snapshot and the new persistent volume claim are in the same namespace.

Reviewer: Can you add a link to the blog post and videos we have on the topic at the bottom?

---
title: Volume Snapshots
description: Use volume snapshots in your development environments
sidebar_label: Volume Snapshots
id: use-volume-snapshots
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Volume snapshots allows you to initialize persistent volume claims with the contents of a preexisting volume snapshot.
Use volume snapshots when working with large datasets or if you want to create development environments with real data coming from your production or staging environments.

## Requirements

<Tabs
  defaultValue="self-hosted"
  values={[
    { label: 'Self-Hosted', value: 'self-hosted', },
    { label: 'SaaS', value: 'saas', },
  ]}
>
<TabItem value="self-hosted">

Follow [this guide](/docs/self-hosted/administration/volume-snapshots/) to enable Volume Snapshots in your cluster.

Use a storage class provisioned by a CSI driver that [supports volume snapshots](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/snapshot-restore-feature.html) for the source persistent volume of your volume snapshots. 

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="saas">
If your instance is hosted by Okteto, Volume Snapshots are enabled by default.

> Use one of the following storage classes for the source of your volume snapshots:

Author: ```suggestion
Use one of the following storage classes for the source persistent volume of your volume snapshots:
```

---
title: Volume Snapshots
description: Use volume snapshots in your development environments
sidebar_label: Volume Snapshots
id: use-volume-snapshots
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Volume snapshots allows you to initialize persistent volume claims with the contents of a preexisting volume snapshot.
Use volume snapshots when working with large datasets or if you want to create development environments with real data coming from your production or staging environments.

## Requirements

<Tabs
  defaultValue="self-hosted"
  values={[
    { label: 'Self-Hosted', value: 'self-hosted', },
    { label: 'SaaS', value: 'saas', },
  ]}
>
<TabItem value="self-hosted">

Follow [this guide](/docs/self-hosted/administration/volume-snapshots/) to enable Volume Snapshots in your cluster.

> Use a storage class provisioned by a CSI driver that [supports volume snapshots](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/snapshot-restore-feature.html) for the source persistent volumes of your volume snapshots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use a storage class provisioned by a CSI driver that [supports volume snapshots](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/snapshot-restore-feature.html) for the source persistent volume of your volume snapshots. 
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="saas">
If your instance is hosted by Okteto, Volume Snapshots are enabled by default.

> Use one of the following storage class for the source persistent volumes of your volume snapshots:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use one of the following storage classes for the source of your volume snapshots:
```

- `csi-okteto-standard`: backed by standard hard disk drives (HDD)
- `csi-okteto-ssd`: backed by solid-state drives (SDD)

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Using Volume Snapshots in your Development Environment

Okteto enables developers to initialize persistent volume claims with the contents of a pre-existing volume snapshot.
The volume snapshot is created from a persistent volume claim and it can contain database backups, big files, images, a copy of your staging data, etc.

> The steps to clone the data of an existing persistent volume into your develepment environment are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to use volume snapshots with your development environment you need to:
```

> - [Create the source persistent volume with the right storage class](/docs/cloud/use-volume-snapshots/#creating-the-persistent-volume)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Create the source persistent volume](/docs/cloud/use-volume-snapshots/#creating-the-persistent-volume)
```

> - [Create a volume snapshot of the source persistent volume](/docs/cloud/use-volume-snapshots/#creating-a-volume-snapshot)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Create a volume snapshot of the source persistent volume](/docs/cloud/use-volume-snapshots/#creating-a-volume-snapshot)
```

- [Consume the volume snapshot in a new persistent volume](/docs/cloud/use-volume-snapshots/#consuming-a-volume-snapshot)

> ### Creating the Persistent Volume

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating the Source Persistent Volume
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, create the source persistent volume. This is the data that you want to be able to clone into your development environment.  In the example below we use a database, but this could be anything that uses a volume for storage: databases, ML models, images, etc...
```

> If the default storage class of your cluster doesn't support volume snapshots, make sure to pick the right storage class when creating your persistent volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If the default storage class of your cluster doesn't support volume snapshots, make sure you set the storage class to one that is compatible when creating your persistent volume.
```

> Check the [requirements](/docs/cloud/use-volume-snapshots/#requirements) section to know more about available storage classes in Okteto.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the [requirements](/docs/cloud/use-volume-snapshots/#requirements) section to learn more about the available storage classes in Okteto.
```

> This is a sample using Kubernetes manifests or Docker Compose files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

<Tabs
  defaultValue="kubernetes"
  values={[
    { label: 'Kubernetes', value: 'kubernetes', },
    { label: 'Compose', value: 'compose', },
  ]}
>
<TabItem value="kubernetes">

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: mysql-pvc
spec:
  storageClassName: csi-okteto-standard
  accessModes:
  - ReadWriteOnce
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 10Gi
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="compose">

```yaml
services:
  mysql:
    image: mysql
    volumes:
      - mysql-pvc:/var/lib/mysql

volumes:
  mysql-pvc:
    driver_opts:
      class: csi-okteto-standard
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Creating a Volume Snapshot

> Volume snapshots are created with the content of the persistent volume at time of creating the volume snapshot. Further updates on the persistent volume aren't reflected in the volume snapshot content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After creating the source persistent volume, the next step is to create the Volume Snapshot. Volume snapshots are created with the content of the persistent volume at the time of creating the volume snapshot. Further updates on the persistent volume aren't reflected in the volume snapshot content.
```

This step is independent of whether you created your persistent volume with Kubernetes manifests or a Docker Compose file:

The following manifest creates a volume snapshot from the `mysql-pvc` persistent volume claim:

```yaml
apiVersion: snapshot.storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: VolumeSnapshot
metadata:
  name: mysql-snapshot
spec:
  volumeSnapshotClassName: okteto-snapshot-class
  source:
    persistentVolumeClaimName: mysql-pvc
```

### Consuming a Volume Snapshot

> 

Reviewer: Final
```suggestion
Finally, you can use the volume snapshot created in the previous step to populate a new persistent volume. 
```

> Use the `dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-name` and `dev.okteto.com/from-snapshot-namespace` annotations on any persistent volume claim to tell Okteto to initialize your persistent volume claim from an existing volume snapshot, as shown below:

Reviewer: We need to add a paragraph explaining what the result of this is, so people know why they are running this commands.
